--- PAGE 1/7 ---
No. ofPrinted Pages : 7 SAE.103
2023
ENGLISH
Maximum Marks : 150
Time : 3 hours
Instructions : Attempt all questions.
Write an essay in about 200 - 250 words on any one of the following
1
20
topics:
(a) Human-Wildlife conflict and solutions to end this conflict
(b) Work From Home (WFH) : Benefits and Drawbacks
(c)
Combating Yellow Journalism
(d) Life perspectives that Covid pandemic has taught us
(e)
Democracy and Social Media
2. You are a data manager heading the data analytics wing of E'T'GH
Solutions, Vijayawada H.O., Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh - 520001' Write
a formal letter in about 100 words to the Managing Director of your
company suggesting the need to introduce office automation in your offrce.
Provide ample reasons for your suggestion. Assume your nalne as vishnu
10
Aggarwal.
3. According to the India Meteorological Department's (IMD) seasonal
forecast, the occurrence of heatwave during March to May is likely to be
experienced over many regions of Rayalaseema and South coastal Andhra
Pradesh and at isolated places over North coastal Andhra Pradesh. In
view of the rising heatwave conditions, the government has cautioned the
public to stay hydrated and follow necessary precautions in order to avoid
falling sick due to heatwaves' The government has also advised people
working outdoors to limit their work schedules before noon in order to
avoid heat strokes and has also cautioned senior citizens, pregrrant women
and children to stay hydrated by consuming oral rehydration solutions,
water, buttermilk and coconut water. Draft a press release to be prepared
based on this. 10
P.T.O
SAE-103 1

--- PAGE 2/7 ---
4 Write a report about the inaugural event of the National Workshop on
Environment Protection which was presided by the Director, Department
of Environment and climate change. Assume yourself as Anvesh Kumar,
Administrative Co-ordinator.
15
5. The pie chart given below describes the projections of global energy
resources. write a report in about 1b0 words explaining the information
given in the chart and your views regarding the future scope of sustainable
development.
15
Global Sustainable Development projections
(2040)
NICoal (47o)
@ Natural Gas (l2Vo)
Oil (lVo)
ffi Carbon Capture, Utilization
and Storage (57o)
Nuclear (117o)
frm
ffi nyaro trszO
ffi Solar Photovoltaic (1920)
ffi wi"a tzrz,)
ffi Other Renewables (97o)
SAE-103 2

--- PAGE 3/7 ---
6. with the centre for women's Development
The Researchers associated
Studies(CWDS)haveorganizedaseminaronthetopicofGender
Equality. Tlne seminar is attended by foreign professors, executive
committee of the CWDS and faculty members' The Secretary of the
Ministry of women and child Development is the chief Guest. The
Chairman of the Indian Council of Social Science Research will preside
ov'er the function. As the convenor of the seminar, you have to deliver the
hrelcome speech'on this occasion. Prepare a written draft of this speech in
15
about 150 - 200 words.
7. Read the passage given below and write a precis on it in your own w$rds in
15
about 100 words :
we stand at the dawn of a new era. The technologlcal revolution is
transforming our Iives at breakneck speed, dramatically altering the ways in
which we work, learn and even live together. Alongside the increasingly
(AI) is
sophisticated use of big data, artificial intelligence undergoing
exponential growth and finding new applications in an ever-increasing
number of sectors, including security, the environment, research and
education, health, culture and trade. AI is humanity's new frontier. once this
boundary is crossed, AI will lead to a new form of human civilization. The
guiding principle of AI is not to become autonomous or replaee human
intelligence. But we must ensure that it is developed through a humanist
approach, based on values and human rights. We are faced with a crucial
question : what kind of society do we want for tomorrow? The AI revolution
opens up exciting new prospects, but the anthropologlcal and social upheaval
it brings in its wake wa:rants careful consideration. AI could open up
tremendous opportunities for achieving the sustainable Development Goals
(sDGs) set by the united Nations in the 2030, Agenda for sustainable
Development. Its applications enable innovative solutions, improved risk
assessment, better planning and faster knowledge shqnnl. The woTld must
ensure that new technologies, especially those based on AI, are used for the
good of our societies and their sustainable development. It should regulate AI
developments and applications so that they conform to the fundamental rights
that frame our democratic horizon'
P.T.O.
SAE.103 3

--- PAGE 4/7 ---
8.
Read the following passage and answer the given questions
: 15
social change may be considered as a process through which definite
alterations in the structures and functions of a particular social system
result. Change is a value-neutral concept and so a particular change may
be good or bad, desirable or undesirable, sacred or profane, progressive or
regressive, depending upon the views and understanding of the observer.
when we say that change is value-free, the idea is not that no distinction
can be made between good changes and bad changes or between welcome
changes and unwelcome developments. It is to be understood that when a
particular social change occurs it w l be evaluated in the light of the
ideals, goals and theories of the observer. If we assess the changes that
have occurred in the Indian society from the middle of the 19*,century, we
notice the two directions in which such changes have proceeded. certain
changes in the traditional values and conventions have been wholry
beneficial and are the result of the social reform movements which had
only marginal influence on the society during the second half of the lgth
century but gathered momentum since 1g20s when the Indian National
Movement became mass based. The second set of changes which have been
increasing in intensity or coverage throughout the 20rh century,
particularly alter independence, constitute the disturbing features of the
present Indian society such as increasing population, crass materialism
coupled with religiosity, but without morality, socio-economic crimes etc.
(a)
What is meant by social change ?
(b)
To what extent is social change value-neutral
?
(c)
What are the major changes that have happened in the Indian
society ?
(d)
what does the passage state about the acceleration of sociar changes
in Indian society ?
(e)
what are the features of present Indian society that revear
a
disturbing side to reality
?
SAE-,I03
4

--- PAGE 5/7 ---
9. (a) Give two examples of sentences using the present perfect tense. 2
(b) Change the voice in the following sentences as directed without
changing the meaning : 1x2=2
(i)
She sings the old ballads melodiously. (change the voice)
(ii)
Sloth leads men to poverty. (change the voice)
(c) :
Transform the sentences below into indirect speech 1x2=2
(i) if
My father said to me, "I am going to giue you a good present
you po;ss entrdnce examination for MBBS."
(ii)
Our teacher said to the students, "Do not waste time and study
well."
(d)
Transform the sentences below as directed without changing the
meaning : 1x2=2
(i)
I do not understand when you speak high sounding words.
(change into a simple sentence)
(ii)
He ran stick in hand. (change into a compound sentence)
(e) FiIl in the blanks in the following sentences with appropriate
articles : 1x2=2
(i) This is book which I purchased from the bookshop at
Abids.
(ii)
I met European in 2019.
(0 Fill in the- blanks in the following sentences with appropriate
propositions.
1x2=2
(i)
Hard work gives success in any field of activity.
(ii)
Every Government official is entrusted the
-
responsibility of working for the welfare ofthe public.
SAE-103 5 P.T.O.

--- PAGE 6/7 ---
(g)
Make sentences using the following idiomatic expressions. your
sentence should bring out the meaning of the idiomatic expression
clearly.
1x2=2
(i)
By hook or by crook
(ii)
Like a hot cake
(h)
Write one word substitutes to the following expressions. 1x2=2
(i)
Making marks that cannot be removed
(ii)
A solution or remedy for all difficulties or diseases
(i)
Write the s5monJrms of the following words.. 1x2=2
(i)
reliable
(ii)
Ioathsome
(j) Write antonyms of the following words. 1x2=2
(i)
fair
(ii)
bold
10. Translate the passage given below from Telugu to English. 15
5o"556ea $Od$ea:
ee6'aiJ$ JoXfa,l"d5o. ro.J6sao $o{)@on" 6otJ,
JDSB)
el6'65on 6ocrdo. epe!& dl6o, esJoSon J"fudoo6. JrJ.be)
erdn'5$S Xf&C SQod XfCsdS Xro"gno: a"oJdeaod SOfueFd,
yosdsc
orSS s.e)SJo eeoeld). JDJ C0eN" 6od nO, 5O, alylo
5oe.3 +e3$ bo"5Jdeao eeoeydD. i:o"55der0y Xl0{:g5on" 6-oa"O.
116 So'?n"o"o, botjrJDer, E54d5&) arer"6 a"Xro"e),
tuOS 56,+fuS J5go: A)6pJf r"@56€a s.e:>*j$) SQX->o":or.
5o"3rro.or 56d J5gno:5e; ,$6 aeJ"e) Sotirelo elgdoo-;or:. 6"Cet
s"o>55o 56;doe!0o6. tsJ"eJ"dD uJyo.o {5Jooet' g5S s"orXr5o
SAE-103 6

--- PAGE 7/7 ---
5g
56;do6oo6. 6lryJ6ea sor$5o Jy,$OC JDtDl1650 1X:5r6o
Sd itg))
5d:cbdoo6. 6C So,$ 666, il^Sd JDSduoet' eso
s5,$f6 a-S6ro IuoG ael)e) 5XD;vlo>
AJcslo56p.$
so55 Csdea5u,5e5s6ec x>o65ea3u tS&6so
JD@Ds6ea
dfu egJDo 5Ouo. se3rro"or 50bUal5l
e5csJP6
r_bdss 1x>erQSoo
El56ol
dfuJ 6o-5d 55go,$o D60-;QIo. ieS$6o JDeJJ avrP
-oo5rO'
-oo,5rO. eg$s{o 65,$) ,,t'e": 6Sael El56o.to avrr ac55ea5
Sfu&, erdtt5 $o6or, X>0,3'5.$el dfu, 5"gl56ea so55
1X>5or5
S;6ea$: erlb X)r.5,$e>: ego6orO.
a
7
SAE-103